number: 68
title: Acquisition Agreement Section 8.6
author_name: Grant
month: Febuary
president_name: Grant
year: 2016
day: 25

Section 8.6 Descriptive Headings; Interpretative Provisions . The headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement. The words “hereof”, “herein” and “hereunder” and words of like import used in this Agreement shall refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this Agreement. References to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and Schedules are to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and Schedules of this Agreement unless otherwise specified. All Exhibits and Schedules annexed hereto or referred to herein are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Agreement as if set forth in full herein. Any capitalized terms used in any Exhibit or Schedule but not otherwise defined therein, shall have the meaning as defined in this Agreement. Any singular term in this Agreement shall be deemed to include the plural, and any plural term the singular. Where a word or phrase is defined herein, each of its other grammatical forms shall have a corresponding meaning. Whenever the words “include”, “includes” or “including” are used in this Agreement, they shall be deemed to be followed by the words “without limitation”, whether or not they are in fact followed by those words or words of like import. Whenever the last day for the exercise of any right or the discharge of any duty under this Agreement falls on other than a Business Day, the party hereto having such right or duty shall have until the next Business Day to exercise such right or discharge such duty. Unless otherwise indicated, the word “day” shall be interpreted as a calendar day. References to “dollars” or “$” mean United States dollars, unless otherwise clearly indicated to the contrary. No summary of this Agreement prepared by or on behalf of any party hereto shall affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.