number: 174
title: Agreement Plan Merger 2 Section 6.04
author_name: Grant
month: Febuary
president_name: Grant
year: 2016
day: 25

Section 6.04          Tax Returns(a)          The Company shall prepare and timely file, or cause to be prepared and timely filed, all Tax Returns required to be filed by it that are due on or before the Closing Date (taking into account any extensions), and shall timely pay all Taxes that are due and payable on or before the Closing Date (taking into account any extensions). Any such Tax Return shall be prepared in a manner consistent with past practice (unless otherwise required by Law).(b)          Parent shall prepare and timely file, or cause to be prepared and timely filed, all Tax Returns required to be filed by the Company after the Closing Date with respect to a Pre-Closing Tax Period and for any Straddle Period. Any such Tax Return shall be prepared in a manner consistent with past practice (unless otherwise required by Law) and shall be submitted by Parent to the Stockholder Representative (together with schedules, statements and, to the extent requested by the Stockholder Representative, supporting documentation) at least 45 days prior to the due date (including extensions) of such Tax Return. If the Stockholder Representative objects to any item on any such Tax Return that relates to a Pre-Closing Tax Period, it shall, within twenty days after delivery of such Tax Return, notify Parent in writing that it so objects, specifying with particularity any such item and stating the specific factual or legal basis for any such objection. If a notice of objection shall be duly delivered, Parent and the Stockholder Representative shall negotiate in good faith and use their reasonable best efforts to resolve such items. If Parent and the Stockholder Representative are unable to reach such agreement within ten days after receipt by Parent of such notice, the disputed items shall be resolved by the Independent Accountant and any determination by the Independent Accountant shall be final. The Independent Accountant shall resolve any disputed items within twenty days of having the item referred to it pursuant to such procedures as it may require. If the Independent Accountant is unable to resolve any disputed items before the due date for such Tax Return, the Tax Return shall be filed as prepared by Parent and then amended to reflect the Independent Accountant's resolution. The costs, fees and expenses of the Independent Accountant shall be borne equally by Parent and the Stockholder Representative. The preparation and filing of any Tax Return of the Company that does not relate to a Pre-Closing Tax Period or Straddle Period shall be exclusively within the control of Parent. Parent shall be entitled to deduct from the Escrow Fund (i) Taxes due with respect to any such Tax Return that relate to Pre-Closing Tax Periods and (ii) Taxes due with respect to any such Tax Return that relate to Straddle Periods that are attributable under Section 6.05 to the portion of such Straddle Period ending on the Closing Date, but only to the extent such Taxes due were not taken into account as liabilities in computing the Closing Working Capital. All deductions for Transaction Expenses, compensatory amounts and similar amounts paid or payable by the Company as a result of or in connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby shall be allocated to and claimed in the taxable year (or portion thereof) ending on the Closing Date to the extent permitted by applicable Law.