number: 92
title: Agreement Plan Merger 3 10.6 
author_name: Grant
month: Febuary
president_name: Grant
year: 2016
day: 25

10.6   Arbitration . Subject to the rights of the Parties to seek injunctive relief, the Parties agree that any and all disputes, claims or controversies arising out of or relating to this Agreement or the other Transaction Documents that are not resolved by their mutual agreement shall be submitted to final and binding arbitration in Delaware, before JAMS, or its successor, pursuant to the United States Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. Sec. 1 et seq. Any Party may commence the arbitration process called for in this Agreement by filing a written demand for arbitration with JAMS, with a copy to the other Party(ies). Within fifteen (15) days after such written demand is sent, Acquiror (on the one hand) and the Stockholder Representative (on the other hand) shall each select one arbitrator from JAMS, and the two (2) arbitrators so selected shall select a third arbitrator from JAMS. The arbitration will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of JAMS’ Commercial  Arbitration  Rules  and  Procedures  in  effect  at  the  time  of  filing  of  the demand for arbitration. The Parties will cooperate with JAMS in scheduling the arbitration proceedings. The Parties covenant that they will participate in the arbitration in good faith. The non-prevailing party shall pay the costs of the arbitrators, but otherwise the Parties will pay their own costs. If there is no determination by the arbitrators of a prevailing party, the Acquiror shall bear one-half of the costs of the arbitrators and the Target Stockholders who are Parties to the arbitration shall bear the other one-half of the costs of the arbitrators. The provisions of this paragraph may be enforced by any court of competent jurisdiction. The arbitration panel shall be authorized to determine which party to the arbitration is the prevailing party and which party is the non-prevailing party. In the event that the arbitrators determine that Acquiror improperly withheld Acquiror Common Stock, the Target Stockholders shall be entitled to interest on such withheld Acquiror Common Stock from the time of improper withholding until final payment thereof calculated at the prime rate of interest charged by money center banks in effect on the date of withholding t as reported in The Wall Street Journal plus three percent (3%), with the value of withheld Acquiror Common Stock taken at the last sale price on the day of such withholding.