number: 128
title: Agreement Plan Merger 2 Section 3.13
author_name: Grant
month: Febuary
president_name: Grant
year: 2016
day: 25

Section 3.13          Insurance. Section 3.13 of the Disclosure Schedules sets forth a true and complete list of all current policies or binders of fire, liability, product liability, umbrella liability, real and personal property, workers' compensation, vehicular, directors’ and officers' liability, fiduciary liability and other casualty and property insurance maintained by Company and relating to the assets, business, operations, employees, officers and directors of the Company (collectively, the “ Insurance Policies ”) and true and complete copies of such Insurance Policies have been made available to Parent. Such Insurance Policies are in full force and effect and shall remain in full force and effect following the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. The Company has not received any written notice of cancellation of, premium increase with respect to, or alteration of coverage under, any of such Insurance Policies. All premiums due on such Insurance Policies have either been paid or, if due and payable prior to Closing, will be paid prior to Closing in accordance with the payment terms of each Insurance Policy. The Insurance Policies do not provide for any retrospective premium adjustment or other experience-based liability on the part of the Company. All such Insurance Policies (a) are valid and binding in accordance with their terms; and (b) have not been subject to any lapse in coverage. There are no claims related to the business of the Company pending under any such Insurance Policies as to which coverage has been questioned, denied or disputed or in respect of which there is an outstanding reservation of rights. The Company is not in default under, and has not otherwise failed to comply with, in any material respect, any provision contained in any such Insurance Policy. The Insurance Policies are of the type and in the amounts customarily carried by Persons conducting a business similar to the Company and are sufficient for compliance with all applicable Laws and Contracts to which the Company is a party or by which it is bound.