number: 57
title: Agreement Plan Merger 3 5.3 
author_name: Grant
month: Febuary
president_name: Grant
year: 2016
day: 25

5.3   Conditions to the Obligations of Acquiror and Merger Sub . The obligations of Acquiror, Merger Sub One and Merger Sub Two to consummate and effect the transactions contemplated by this Agreement shall be subject to the satisfaction at or prior to the Closing of each of the following conditions, any of which may be waived, in writing, by Acquiror:(a)   Representations, Warranties and Covenants . The representations and warranties of Target in this Agreement shall be true and correct in all material respects, on and as of the Agreement Date and on and as of the Closing as though such representations and warranties were made on and as of such time (except for such representations and warranties that speak specifically as of the Agreement Date or as of another date, which shall be true and correct as of such date).(b)   Performance of Obligations . Target shall have performed and complied in all material respects with all covenants, obligations and conditions of this Agreement required to be performed and complied with by it prior to or at the Closing.(c)   Certificate of Officer . Acquiror shall have received a certificate executed on behalf of Target, by the an officer of Target certifying that the conditions set forth in Sections 5.3(a) and 5.3(b) have been satisfied.(d)   Escrow Agreement . The Escrow Agent, Target and the Stockholder Representative shall have executed and delivered the Escrow Agreement.(e)   Registration and Restriction Agreement . Acquiror and Target Stockholders shall have executed and delivered the Registration and Restriction Agreement.(f)   Voting Agreement .  Holdings shall have executed and delivered the Voting Agreement.(g)   Consents Obtained . All consents and approvals of any Person necessary to the consummation of the Closing and the Merger, including the Required Contract Consents set forth on Schedule 3.14(b) of the Target Disclosure Schedules shall have been obtained, and a copy of each such consent or approval shall have been provided to Acquiror.(h)   FIRPTA Documents . Target shall have delivered to Acquiror (i) a statement (in such form as may be reasonably requested by counsel to Acquiror) conforming to the requirements of Section 1.897 - 2(h)(1)(i) of the United States Treasury Regulations, and (ii) the notification to the Internal Revenue Service required under Section 1.897 — 2(h)(2) of the United States Treasury Regulations.(i)   Payment Schedule . Acquiror shall have received the Payment Schedule.(j)   Resignation Letters . Target shall have delivered to Acquiror written resignations of all officers and directors of Target effective as of the Effective Time.(k)   Secretary’s Certificate . Target shall have delivered to the Acquiror a certificate of the Secretary of Target certifying that attached or appended to such certificate: (i) is a true and correct copy of the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws, and all amendments thereto; (ii) is a true copy of all corporate actions taken by it, including unanimous written resolutions of its Board of Directors and all other parties as required by Target’s Certificate of Incorporation, authorizing the consummation of the Merger and the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and each of the Transaction Documents to be delivered by Target pursuant hereto; (iii) is a true copy of all resolutions of Target Stockholders authorizing the consummation of the Merger and the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and each of the Transaction Documents to be delivered by Target pursuant hereto and (iv) the names and signatures of its duly elected or appointed officers who are authorized to execute and deliver this Agreement, the Transaction Documents to which Target is a party and any certificate, document or other instrument in connection herewith.(l)   Certificates of Good Standing .  Target and Holdings shall have delivered to Acquiror certificates of good standing from the Delaware and Massachusetts Secretaries of State, dated as of a date not more than seven (7) days prior to Closing Date, certifying that Target is in good standing in the State of Delaware and in The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.(m)   Other Documents .  Target shall have delivered to Acquiror such other documents as are required to be delivered by Target to Acquiror pursuant to this Agreement.